[[chap_tutorials]]
== Tutorials

In this chapter we shall describe in detail the process of setup, simulation
and post-processing for some {project} test cases, with the principal aim of
introducing a user to the basic procedures of running {project}. The
dirname:tutorials[] directory in the {project} distribution contains many more
cases that demonstrate the use of all the solvers and many utilities supplied
with {project}. Before attempting to run the tutorials, the user must first
make sure that they have installed {project} correctly.

The tutorial cases describe the use of the `blockMesh` pre-processing tool,
case setup and running {project} solvers and post-processing using `para`.
Those users with access to third-party post-processing tools supported in
{project} have an option: either they can follow the tutorials using `para`; or
refer to the description of the use of the third-party product in
<<chap_postProcessing>> when post-processing is required.

Copies of all tutorials are available from the
dirname:tutorials[](((dirname:tutorials[] directory)))
(((directory,dirname:tutorials[]))) directory of the {project} installation.
The tutorials are organised into a set of directories according to the type of
flow and then subdirectories according to solver. For example, all the
`ico` cases are stored within a subdirectory dirname:incompressible/icoFoam[],
where 'incompressible' indicates the type of flow. If the user wishes to run a
range of example cases, it is recommended that the user copy the
dirname:tutorials[] directory into a local directory. We will refer to this
directory as '<tutorials>' for the remainder of this guide.

include::cavity.txt[]

include::plateHole.txt[]

include::damBreak.txt[]
